Dataset Overview

The spirit of data science includes exploration, traversing the unknown, and applying a deep understanding of the challenge you're facing. In an academic setting, it's hard to duplicate these tasks, but this lab will attempt to take a few steps away from the traditional, textbook, "plug the equation in" pattern, so you can get a taste of what analyzing data in the real world is all about.

After the September 11 attacks, a series of secret regulations, laws, and processes were enacted, perhaps to better protect the citizens of the United States. These processes continued through President Bush's term and were renewed and strengthened during the Obama administration. Then, on May 24, 2006, the United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) made a fundamental shift in its approach to Section 215 of the Patriot Act, permitting the FBI to compel the production of "business records" relevant to terrorism investigations, which are shared with the NSA. The court now defined as business records the entirety of a telephone company's call database, also known as Call Detail Records (CDR or metadata).

News of this came to public light after an ex-NSA contractor leaked the information, and a few more questions were raised when it was further discovered that not just the call records of suspected terrorists were being collected in bulk... but perhaps the entirety of Americans as a whole. After all, if you know someone who knows someone who knows someone, your private records are relevant to a terrorism investigation. The white house quickly reassured the public in a press release that "Nobody is listening to your telephone calls," since, "that's not what this program is about." The public was greatly relieved.

The questions you'll be exploring in this lab assignment using K-Means are: exactly how useful is telephone metadata? It must have some use, otherwise, the government wouldn't have invested however many millions they did into it secretly collecting it from phone carriers. Also what kind of intelligence can you extract from CDR metadata besides its face value?

You will be using a sample CDR dataset generated for 10 people living in the Dallas, Texas metroplex area. Your task will be to attempt to do what many researchers have already successfully done - partly de-anonymize the CDR data. People generally behave in predictable manners, moving from home to work with a few errands in between. With enough call data, given a few K-locations of interest, K-Means should be able to isolate rather easily the geolocations where a person spends most of their time.

Note: to safeguard from doxing people, the CDR dataset you'll be using for this assignment was generated using the tools available in the Dive Deeper section. CDRs are at least supposed to be protected by privacy laws and are the basis for proprietary revenue calculations. In reality, there are quite a few public CDRs out there. Much information can be discerned from them such as social networks, criminal acts, and believe it or not, even the spread of diseases as was demonstrated by the Flowminder Foundation paper on Ebola.

A call detail record (CDR) is a data record produced by a telephone exchange or other telecommunications equipment that documents the details of a telephone call or other telecommunications transaction (e.g., text message) that passes through that facility or device.

The record contains various attributes of the call, such as time, duration, completion status, source number, and destination number. It is the automated equivalent of the paper toll tickets that were written and timed by operators for long-distance calls in a manual telephone exchange.
